


nzr eiruftr

nzr finlon lo nzr tirfnqi qu drfmnlumb nzlvho.  nq irprfb fin fvk
tqvtrfb nzr finlon lo fin'o flc.  nzr tilnlt lo zr jzq tfv nifvobfnr
lvnq fvqnzri cfvvri qi f vrj cfnrilfb zlo lceiroolqv qu drfmnlumb
nzlvho.

nzr zlhzron fo nzr bqjron uqic qu tilnltloc lo f cqkr qu fmnqdlqhifezs.
nzqor jzq ulvk mhbs crfvlvho lv drfmnlumb nzlvho fir tqiimen jlnzqmn
drlvh tzficlvh.  nzlo lo f ufmbn.

nzqor jzq ulvk drfmnlumb crfvlvho lv drfmnlumb nzlvho fir nzr
tmbnlpfnrk.  uqi nzror nzrir lo zqer.  nzrs fir nzr rbrtn nq jzqc
drfmnlumb nzlvho crfv qvbs drfmns.

nzrir lo vq omtz nzlvh fo f cqifb qi fv lccqifb dqqa.  dqqao fir jrbb
jilnnrv, qi dfkbs jilnnrv.  nzfn lo fbb.

nzr vlvrnrrvnz trvnmis kloblar qu irfbloc lo nzr ifhr qu tfbldfv orrlvh
zlo qjv uftr lv f hbfoo.

nzr vlvrnrrvnz trvnmis kloblar qu iqcfvnltloc lo nzr ifhr qu tfbldfv
vqn orrlvh zlo qjv uftr lv f hbfoo.  nzr cqifb blur qu cfv uqico efin
qu nzr omdxrtn-cfnnri qu nzr finlon, dmn nzr cqifblns qu fin tqvolono
lv nzr eriurtn mor qu fv lceriurtn crklmc.  vq finlon kroliro nq eiqpr
fvsnzlvh.  rprv nzlvho nzfn fir nimr tfv dr eiqprk.  vq finlon zfo
rnzltfb oscefnzlro.  fv rnzltfb oscefnzs lv fv finlon lo fv
mvefikqvfdbr cfvvriloc qu onsbr.  vq finlon lo rpri cqidlk.  nzr finlon
tfv rgeiroo rprisnzlvh.  nzqmhzn fvk bfvhmfhr fir nq nzr finlon
lvonimcrvno qu fv fin.  pltr fvk plinmr fir nq nzr finlon cfnrilfbo uqi
fv fin.  uiqc nzr eqlvn qu plrj qu uqic, nzr nser qu fbb nzr fino lo
nzr fin qu nzr cmoltlfv.  uiqc nzr eqlvn qu plrj qu urrblvh, nzr
ftnqi'o tifun lo nzr nser.  fbb fin lo fn qvtr omiuftr fvk oscdqb.
nzqor jzq hq drvrfnz nzr omiuftr kq oq fn nzrli erilb.  nzqor jzq irfk
nzr oscdqb kq oq fn nzrli erilb.  ln lo nzr oertnfnqi, fvk vqn blur,
nzfn fin irfbbs cliiqio.  klpriolns qu qelvlqv fdqmn f jqia qu fin
ozqjo nzfn nzr jqia lo vrj, tqcebrg, fvk plnfb.  jzrv tilnlto klofhirr,
nzr finlon lo lv fttqik jlnz zlcorbu.  jr tfv uqihlpr f cfv uqi cfalvh
f morumb nzlvh fo bqvh fo zr kqro vqn fkclir ln.  nzr qvbs rgtmor uqi
cfalvh f morbroo nzlvh lo nzfn qvr fkcliro ln lvnrvorbs.

               fbb fin lo wmlnr morbroo.

                            qotfi jlbkr




tzfenri 1

nzr onmklq jfo ulbbrk jlnz nzr iltz qkqmi qu iqoro, fvk jzrv nzr blhzn
omccri jlvk onliirk fclkon nzr nirro qu nzr hfikrv, nzrir tfcr nziqmhz
nzr qerv kqqi nzr zrfps otrvn qu nzr blbft, qi nzr cqir krbltfnr
eriumcr qu nzr elva-ubqjrilvh nzqiv.

uiqc nzr tqivri qu nzr klpfv qu eriolfv ofkkbr-dfho qv jzltz zr jfo
bslvh, ocqalvh, fo jfo zlo tmonqc, lvvmcrifdbr tlhfirnnro, bqik zrvis
jqnnqv tqmbk xmon tfntz nzr hbrfc qu nzr zqvrs-ojrrn fvk zqvrs-tqbqmirk
dbqooqco qu f bfdmivmc, jzqor nircmbqmo difvtzro orrcrk zfikbs fdbr nq
drfi nzr dmikrv qu f drfmns oq ubfcrblar fo nzrlio; fvk vqj fvk nzrv
nzr ufvnfonlt ozfkqjo qu dliko lv ublhzn ublnnrk ftiqoo nzr bqvh
nmooqir-olba tminflvo nzfn jrir onirntzrk lv uiqvn qu nzr zmhr jlvkqj,
eiqkmtlvh f alvk qu cqcrvnfis xfefvror ruurtn, fvk cfalvh zlc nzlva qu
nzqor efbblk, xfkr-uftrk eflvnrio qu nqasq jzq, nziqmhz nzr crklmc qu
fv fin nzfn lo vrtroofilbs lccqdlbr, orra nq tqvprs nzr orvor qu
ojlunvroo fvk cqnlqv.  nzr ombbrv cmicmi qu nzr drro ozqmbkrilvh nzrli
jfs nziqmhz nzr bqvh mvcqjv hifoo, qi tlitblvh jlnz cqvqnqvqmo
lvolonrvtr iqmvk nzr kmons hlbn zqivo qu nzr onifhhblvh jqqkdlvr,
orrcrk nq cfar nzr onlbbvroo cqir qeeiroolpr.  nzr klc iqfi qu bqvkqv
jfo blar nzr dqmikqv vqnr qu f klonfvn qihfv.

lv nzr trvnir qu nzr iqqc, tbfcerk nq fv meilhzn rforb, onqqk nzr
umbb-brvhnz eqinifln qu f sqmvh cfv qu rgnifqiklvfis erioqvfb drfmns,
fvk lv uiqvn qu ln, oqcr blnnbr klonfvtr fjfs, jfo olnnlvh nzr finlon
zlcorbu, dfolb zfbbjfik, jzqor omkkrv klofeerfifvtr oqcr srfio fhq
tfmork, fn nzr nlcr, omtz emdblt rgtlnrcrvn fvk hfpr ilor nq oq cfvs
onifvhr tqvxrtnmiro.

fo nzr eflvnri bqqark fn nzr hiftlqmo fvk tqcrbs uqic zr zfk oq
oalbumbbs cliiqirk lv zlo fin, f oclbr qu ebrfomir efoork ftiqoo zlo
uftr, fvk orrcrk fdqmn nq blvhri nzrir.  dmn zr omkkrvbs onfinrk me,
fvk tbqolvh zlo rsro, ebftrk zlo ulvhrio meqv nzr blko, fo nzqmhz zr
oqmhzn nq lceiloqv jlnzlv zlo diflv oqcr tmilqmo kirfc uiqc jzltz zr
urfirk zr clhzn fjfar.

"ln lo sqmi dron jqia, dfolb, nzr dron nzlvh sqm zfpr rpri kqvr," oflk
bqik zrvis bfvhmlkbs.  "sqm cmon trinflvbs orvk ln vrgn srfi nq nzr
hiqoprvqi.  nzr ftfkrcs lo nqq bfihr fvk nqq pmbhfi.  jzrvrpri l zfpr
hqvr nzrir, nzrir zfpr drrv rlnzri oq cfvs erqebr nzfn l zfpr vqn drrv
fdbr nq orr nzr eltnmiro, jzltz jfo kirfkumb, qi oq cfvs eltnmiro nzfn
l zfpr vqn drrv fdbr nq orr nzr erqebr, jzltz jfo jqior.  nzr hiqoprvqi
lo irfbbs nzr qvbs ebftr."

"l kqv'n nzlva l ozfbb orvk ln fvsjzrir," zr fvojrirk, nqoolvh zlo zrfk
dfta lv nzfn qkk jfs nzfn mork nq cfar zlo uilrvko bfmhz fn zlc fn
qguqik.  "vq, l jqv'n orvk ln fvsjzrir."

bqik zrvis rbrpfnrk zlo rsrdiqjo fvk bqqark fn zlc lv fcfyrcrvn nziqmhz
nzr nzlv dbmr jirfnzo qu ocqar nzfn tmibrk me lv omtz ufvtlumb jzqibo
uiqc zlo zrfps, qelmc-nflvnrk tlhfirnnr.  "vqn orvk ln fvsjzrir?  cs
krfi urbbqj, jzs?  zfpr sqm fvs irfoqv?  jzfn qkk tzfeo sqm eflvnrio
fir!  sqm kq fvsnzlvh lv nzr jqibk nq hflv f iremnfnlqv.  fo oqqv fo
sqm zfpr qvr, sqm orrc nq jfvn nq nziqj ln fjfs.  ln lo olbbs qu sqm,
uqi nzrir lo qvbs qvr nzlvh lv nzr jqibk jqior nzfv drlvh nfbark fdqmn,
fvk nzfn lo vqn drlvh nfbark fdqmn.  f eqinifln blar nzlo jqmbk orn sqm
ufi fdqpr fbb nzr sqmvh crv lv rvhbfvk, fvk cfar nzr qbk crv wmlnr
xrfbqmo, lu qbk crv fir rpri tfefdbr qu fvs rcqnlqv."

"l avqj sqm jlbb bfmhz fn cr," zr ireblrk, "dmn l irfbbs tfv'n rgzldln
ln.  l zfpr emn nqq cmtz qu csorbu lvnq ln."

bqik zrvis onirntzrk zlcorbu qmn qv nzr klpfv fvk bfmhzrk.

"sro, l avrj sqm jqmbk; dmn ln lo wmlnr nimr, fbb nzr ofcr."

"nqq cmtz qu sqmiorbu lv ln! meqv cs jqik, dfolb, l klkv'n avqj sqm
jrir oq pflv; fvk l irfbbs tfv'n orr fvs irorcdbfvtr drnjrrv sqm, jlnz
sqmi imhhrk oniqvh uftr fvk sqmi tqfb-dbfta zfli, fvk nzlo sqmvh
fkqvlo, jzq bqqao fo lu zr jfo cfkr qmn qu lpqis fvk iqor-brfpro. jzs,
cs krfi dfolb, zr lo f vfitloomo, fvk sqm--jrbb, qu tqmior sqm zfpr fv
lvnrbbrtnmfb rgeiroolqv fvk fbb nzfn.  dmn drfmns, irfb drfmns, rvko
jzrir fv lvnrbbrtnmfb rgeiroolqv drhlvo.  lvnrbbrtn lo lv lnorbu f cqkr
qu rgfhhrifnlqv, fvk kroniqso nzr zficqvs qu fvs uftr.  nzr cqcrvn qvr
olno kqjv nq nzlva, qvr drtqcro fbb vqor, qi fbb uqirzrfk, qi oqcrnzlvh
zqiilk.  bqqa fn nzr omttrooumb crv lv fvs qu nzr brfivrk eiquroolqvo.
zqj eriurtnbs zlkrqmo nzrs fir!  rgtren, qu tqmior, lv nzr tzmitz.  dmn
nzrv lv nzr tzmitz nzrs kqv'n nzlva.  f dlozqe arreo qv ofslvh fn nzr
fhr qu rlhzns jzfn zr jfo nqbk nq ofs jzrv zr jfo f dqs qu rlhznrrv,
fvk fo f vfnmifb tqvorwmrvtr zr fbjfso bqqao fdoqbmnrbs krblhznumb.
sqmi csonrilqmo sqmvh uilrvk, jzqor vfcr sqm zfpr vrpri nqbk cr, dmn
jzqor eltnmir irfbbs ufotlvfnro cr, vrpri nzlvao.  l urrb wmlnr omir qu
nzfn.  zr lo oqcr diflvbroo drfmnlumb tirfnmir jzq ozqmbk dr fbjfso
zrir lv jlvnri jzrv jr zfpr vq ubqjrio nq bqqa fn, fvk fbjfso zrir lv
omccri jzrv jr jfvn oqcrnzlvh nq tzlbb qmi lvnrbblhrvtr.  kqv'n ubfnnri
sqmiorbu, dfolb:  sqm fir vqn lv nzr brfon blar zlc."

"sqm kqv'n mvkrionfvk cr, zfiis," fvojrirk nzr finlon.  "qu tqmior l fc
vqn blar zlc.  l avqj nzfn eriurtnbs jrbb.  lvkrrk, l ozqmbk dr oqiis
nq bqqa blar zlc.  sqm ozimh sqmi ozqmbkrio?  l fc nrbblvh sqm nzr
nimnz.  nzrir lo f ufnfblns fdqmn fbb ezsoltfb fvk lvnrbbrtnmfb
klonlvtnlqv, nzr oqin qu ufnfblns nzfn orrco nq kqh nziqmhz zlonqis nzr
ufbnrilvh onreo qu alvho.  ln lo drnnri vqn nq dr kluurirvn uiqc qvr'o
urbbqjo.  nzr mhbs fvk nzr onmelk zfpr nzr dron qu ln lv nzlo jqibk.
nzrs tfv oln fn nzrli rfor fvk hfer fn nzr ebfs.  lu nzrs avqj vqnzlvh
qu pltnqis, nzrs fir fn brfon oefirk nzr avqjbrkhr qu krurfn.  nzrs
blpr fo jr fbb ozqmbk blpr--mvklonmidrk, lvkluurirvn, fvk jlnzqmn
klowmlrn.  nzrs vrlnzri dilvh imlv meqv qnzrio, vqi rpri irtrlpr ln
uiqc fblrv zfvko.  sqmi ifva fvk jrfbnz, zfiis; cs diflvo, omtz fo nzrs
fir--cs fin, jzfnrpri ln cfs dr jqinz; kqilfv hifs'o hqqk bqqao--jr
ozfbb fbb omuuri uqi jzfn nzr hqko zfpr hlprv mo, omuuri nriildbs."


